Here we report that the eye's pupils constrict after reading brightness-conveying words (e.g. 'sun') compared to darkness-conveying words (e.g. 'night'). This effect arises slowly and gradually, and, in our experiment, peaked between 1.5 and 2 s after word onset.

Our findings have important implications for theories of embodied language. Our starting premise is that an indirect (i.e. without direct visual stimulation) pupillary light response reflects sensory representations that are similar to those that arise during perception [@Laeng2014Imaginary], and presumably involve visual brain areas [@Mathôt2014]. Our findings therefore suggest that word comprehension can induce activity in visual brain areas, and even trigger physiological (pupillary) responses, in a way that corresponds to the word's meaning. This is in line with a strongly embodied view of language, which holds that language processing involves sensory and motor areas of the brain [@Pulvermüller2013;@GlenberGallese2012]. However, we also found that this semantic pupillary effect arose late, and peaked only about a second after participants had processed the word's meaning and responded to it. This suggests that sensory and motor representations, at least those that are involved in pupillary responses, are not necessary for word comprehension: The pupil responds to the semantic brightness of words, but this pupillary response is not part of word comprehension itself [@MahonCaramazza2008].

Is it possible that, in our experiment, word comprehension did rapidly trigger activity in visual brain areas, but that the pupil simply responded very slowly to this? This is unlikely, if you compare the present results to those from an attentional-capture experiment that we conducted previously [@Mathôt2014]. In this experiment, attention was covertly (without eye movements) captured toward a bright or dark background. Within about 500 ms, the pupil became larger when attention was captured toward a dark, compared to a bright, background. More specifically, attentional capture toward brightness or darkness modulated the initial pupillary dilation that we also observed in the present experiment, but which was not modulated by semantic brightness (the peak around .6 s in %FigMainResults). Phrased differently, indirect pupillary light responses can emerge far more rapidly than we have observed in the present experiment.

Does this mean that sensory and motor representations are merely by-products of word comprehension, without any function? Not necessarily: While we think it is unlikely that, at least in our experiment, sensory and motor representations were necessary for participants to understand the words, such representations may nevertheless be useful for preparation. For example, when you hear the name of an object that is in your field of view, you are very likely to look at it [@Cooper1974]; therefore, the pupillary constriction that is triggered by reading the word 'lamp' may reflect preparation for looking at a lamp [@Mathôt2015EyePrep]. Similarly, when you read the word 'night', the words that follow are likely to be related to the concept of darkness, as in the sentence "the night was dark." Therefore, it is conceivable that the sensory and motor representations that are triggered by one word (here 'night') facilitate comprehension of subsequent semantically related words (here 'dark') [cf. @Strijkers2015]. In this view, sensory and motor representations that arise during word comprehension are not part of the comprehension process--at least not of the word that triggered the representations--but are a way to mentally prepare for perceptions, actions, and words that are likely to occur in the immediate future.

In summary, we have shown that the pupil constricts when reading brightness- compared to darkness-conveying words. This suggests that word comprehension can activate sensory representations, and even trigger physiological (pupillary) responses; however, the pupillary response to semantic brightness arose too late to be a necessary part of word comprehension. Instead, we have suggested that this response may reflect preparation for the immediate future: When you read the word 'lamp', you prepare to look at at a lamp, and you expect subsequent words to be related to brightness; this may cause your pupils to constrict.
