How are you able to understand the words that compose this sentence?

Embodied theories of language hold that you understand words--at least those that refer to concrete actions or objects--by mentally simulating what you can do with their referents, and what these referents look, smell, and feel like. For example, according to embodied language, when you read the word 'keyboard,' you mentally simulate a typing action; and when you read the word 'sun,' you simulate the perception of a bright ball of fire in the sky. Strongly embodied views of language hold that such simulations are necessary for comprehension; that is, to understand what 'sun' means, you would need a sensory representation of what it looks like [@GlenberGallese2012;@Pulvermüller2013]. Weakly embodied views of language hold that simulations may facilitate language comprehension, but are not strictly necessary; that is, mentally picturing the sun may help you to read 'sun' faster, but you could understand 'sun' even without any sensory representation of it, by relying on a symbolic system [@Zwaan2014;@MahonCaramazza2008;@BednyCaramazza2011;@Meteyard2012].

Most support for embodied language comes from two general approaches: behavioral studies that look at compatibility effects between word meaning and action (or perception) [@Meteyard2008;@Meteyard2007;@Kaschak2005;@Zwaan2004;@Aravena2012;@GlenbergKaschak2002;@ZwaanTaylor2006]; and neuroimaging studies that compare brain activity during language comprehension with brain activity during action (or perception) [@Hauk2004;@Revill2008;@Vigliocco2006]. A compelling example of a behavioral compatibility effect was reported by Meteyard and colleagues [-@Meteyard2008], who found that upward/ downward visual motion affects comprehension speed of words with an upward/ downward meaning [see also @Kaschak2005;@Meteyard2007]; that is, participants decided more quickly that 'fall' was a real word (as opposed to a nonword) when they simultaneously saw downward-moving dots. From this, Meteyard and colleagues concluded that understanding downward-conveying words involves, at least in part, the same brain areas as perception of downward motion. This conclusion is supported by neuroimaging studies that show overlap in the brain areas that are active during both reading of words associated with motion, and perception of motion [@Revill2008].

However, behavioral studies have so far not directly tested one of the central predictions of embodied language: that word meaning by itself can, at least in some cases, trigger associated actions. To illustrate this point, consider a landmark study by Glenberg and Kaschak [-@GlenbergKaschak2002] in which participants judged whether sentences were sensible or not. These sentences conveyed a movement toward or away from the body (e.g. 'open the drawer' for movement toward and 'close the drawer' for movement away from the body), and participants responded by moving their hand either toward or away from their body (e.g. toward for sensible and away for nonsensible sentences, or the other way around). The crucial finding was that responses were fastest when the direction of the response coincided with the movement direction implied by the sentence; that is, when participants read 'open the drawer,' they were fastest when responding with a movement toward the body. This showed that word meaning can modulate actions. However, in this experiment, word meaning did not trigger actions; rather, word meaning sped up (or slowed down) actions that were imposed by the task. To our knowledge, the same is true for all behavioral studies that have investigated the effect of word meaning on action. These studies demonstrate (sometimes very convincingly) that word meaning can modulate actions [e.g. modulate grip force, @Aravena2012; or speed up manual responses, @GlenbergKaschak2002; @ZwaanTaylor2006], but not that word meaning can by itself trigger an action.

Here we show that word meaning by itself can trigger an involuntary movement: the pupillary light response (PLR). The PLR was traditionally believed to be a low-level reflex to light. However, recent studies have shown that the light response, while beyond direct voluntary control, is sensitive to high-level cognition [reviewed in @Binda2014Trends;@Mathôt2015CurrDir]. For example, the pupil constricts when you covertly (without looking at it) attend to a bright, compared to a dark, object [@Mathôt2013Plos;@Binda2013Bright;@Naber2013Track]. Similarly, the pupil constricts when you imagine a bright object [@Laeng2014Imaginary], or when a bright object reaches awareness in a binocular-rivalry paradigm [@Naber2011]. These phenomena are often explained in terms of top-down modulation of visual brain areas [@Wang2012Micro;@Mathôt2014;@WangMunoz2016]; that is, the pupil constricts when you covertly attend to a bright object, because attention enhances the representation of the bright object throughout visual cortical and subcortical areas [@Kastner1998].

This reasoning can be naturally extended to embodied language: If word comprehension activates visual brain areas (i.e. creates sensory representations), then understanding words that convey a sense of brightness or darkness should trigger pupillary responses--just like attending to [@Mathôt2013Plos] or imagining [@Laeng2014Imaginary] bright or dark objects. Phrased differently, if brightness-conveying words trigger a pupillary constriction relative to darkness-conveying words, this would support the view that word comprehension affects sensory brain areas, and can even trigger involuntary (pupillary) movement. To our knowledge, this would also be the first direct demonstration that word comprehension by itself can trigger movement, rather than merely modulate an action that has been imposed by task instructions.

To test this hypothesis, we conducted two experiments in which participants read (visual experiment) or listened to (auditory experiment) brightness- and darkness-conveying words. We measured pupil size, and predicted that the pupil would be smaller when participants read or listened to brightness- compared to darkness-conveying words: a pupillary light response triggered by word meaning.
