Trials were discarded when participants gave an incorrect response (false alarms and misses; visual experiment: 0.36%; auditory experiment: 0.44%++; control experiment: 1.12%++), and when pupil-size recordings contained artifacts (trials in which pupil size was less than 0.5 or more than 2.5 times baseline were excluded, because this generally corresponded to unreconstructed blinks or signal loss; visual experiment: 10.1%; auditory experiment: 4.5%++; control experiment: 4.2%++). The average response time to animal words was 790 ms (SE=8.6) for the visual experiment, 1067 ms (SE=12.5) for the auditory experiment++, and 790 ms (SE=10.0) for the control experiment++. No participants were excluded from the analysis.


## Pupil-size results

The main results ++(for the visual and auditory experiments)++ are shown in %FigMainResults, in which pupil size is plotted over time from word onset, separately for brightness-conveying, darkness-conveying, and neutral words. (Animal names are not shown, because the pupillary response is distorted by participants' key-press responses.) As predicted, the pupil was smaller when participants read or heard brightness- compared to darkness-conveying words (statistics described below). This effect was present for both visually presented (%FigMainResults::a) and spoken (%FigMainResults::b) words. The effect arose gradually and slowly, and peaked between 1 and 2 s after word onset. For neutral words, which did not convey a specific sense of brightness, pupil size was intermediate.

In addition to the effect of semantic brightness, in the visual experiment there was a pronounced pupillary dilation that peaked around 0.6 s after word onset (%FigMainResults::a). This is an alerting effect, or orienting response [@WangMunoz2015;@Mathôt2014]. This early pupillary response was not clearly modulated by the semantic brightness of the words, and was followed by a pronounced constriction, which always follows visual changes [e.g. @Mathôt2015Intra]. In the auditory experiment, there was no visual stimulation to trigger pupillary constriction, and the pupil therefore dilated throughout the trial, with no clear distinction between the early orientation response and later dilation due to task-related effort.


%--
figure:
 id: FigMainResults
 source: FigMainResults.svg
 caption: |
  Pupil size over time, as a function of whether a brightness-conveying (e.g. 'illuminé' or 'illuminated'), darkness-conveying (e.g. 'foncé' or 'dark'), or neutral (e.g. 'charmant' or 'charming') word was presented. Error bands are standard errors. Significance thresholds are based on the contrast between brightness- and darkness-conveying words (see main text for details). The vertical dotted line indicates the mean response time to animal words. a) Results for the visual experiment. b) Results for the auditory experiment.
--%


++Pupil size is reported as a proportion of pupil size at word onset, and smoothed with a 51 ms hanning window.++ Blinks were reconstructed with cubic-spline interpolation [@Mathôt2013Blinks]. Only brightness- and darkness-conveying words were carefully matched (see Methods), and therefore only these two categories were included in statistical tests. (However, including all words yields similar results; see Supplementary Information.) ++For each 10 ms window, we conducted a linear-mixed effects model (with the R package `lme4`) with pupil size as dependent variable, semantic brightness (bright or dark) as fixed effect, and random by-participant intercepts and slopes (model: `pupil_size ~ brightness + (1+brightness|participant)`). We commonly use a significance threshold of at least 200 contiguous milliseconds where p < .05 [@Mathôt2013Plos]. To estimate p-values, we use the (computationally fast) *t*-as-*z* approach, such that *t* = 1.96 corresponds to *p* = .05, etc. This approach is anticonservative, but only slightly so given our sample size [@Luke2016]. With this criterion, the effect is reliable from 1310 to 2410 ms and 2440 - 2760 ms in the visual experiment, and from 1030 to 1360 ms in the auditory experiment.++ However, for visualization, we have annotated %FigMainResults with three alpha thresholds (p < .05, p < .01, p < .005) and no minimum number of contiguous samples.

To test how general the effect is, we also looked at mean pupil size during the 1 - 2 s window for individual participants and words (%FigIndividualResults). As shown in %FigIndividualResults::a,b, the majority of the participants showed an effect in the predicted direction, and this effect was supported by a default Bayesian one-sided, one-sample t-test [with JASP [@Love2015]; visual experiment: Bf=51.3; auditory experiment: Bf=4.1; combined Bf=211.1, or 'decisive evidence' in support of a positive effect]. As shown in %FigIndividualResults::b,c, the effect of semantic brightness was small relative to the variability between words; however, there was a clear shift in the distribution of pupil sizes, so that pupil size was slightly larger for darkness- than brightness-conveying words, which was again supported by a default Bayesian one-sided, independent-samples t-test (visual experiment: Bf=6.7; auditory experiment: Bf=3.8; combined Bf=25.4, or 'strong evidence' in support of larger pupils for darkness- than brightness-conveying words). The results were similar when analyzing the full 3 s of the trial, rather than the 1 - 2 s window (see Supplementary Information).


%--
figure:
 id: FigIndividualResults
 source: FigIndividualResults.svg
 caption: |
  a, b) The difference in pupil size between darkness- and brightness-conveying words for all participants, ordered by effect size. a) Results for the visual experiment. b) Results for the auditory experiment. c, d) Pupil size for individual darkness- (blue) and brightness-conveying (orange) words, ordered by pupil size. c) Results for the visual experiment. d) Results for the auditory experiment. Error bars indicate standard errors. Pupil size is based on the 1 - 2 s window.
--%


## The effects of valence and emotional intensity

To test whether the effect of semantic brightness could be due to differences in valence or emotional intensity, we analyzed the subjective ratings for the semantic brightness, valence (positive/ negative), and emotional intensity of all words.

++First, participants agreed with our own categorization of brightness- (rated darkness: M=0.84, SD = 0.24, from a 0 [bright] to 4 [dark] scale) and darkness-conveying words (rated darkness: M=3.00, SD=0.24, independent-samples t-test: t(64)=36.43, p<.001).++

++Second, we found a strong and reliable correlation between brightness and valence (r=.89, p<.001), such that bright words were rated more positive than dark words. Valence probably has no effect on pupil size beyond that of emotional intensity; that is, the pupil dilates as much to negative as to positive stimuli if they are of equal emotional intensity [@Collins1967]. The correlation between brightness and valence was so strong that we could not take it into account statistically. Therefore, we conducted a control experiment in which we looked at the pupillary response to positive and negative words that did not have any association with brightness. This experiment confirmed that valence has no notable effect on pupil size: When looking at the effect per participant, a default Bayesian two-sided one-sample t-test provided 'substantial' evidence for the null hypothesis (Bf=4.9 in support of no effect); and when looking at the effect per word, a default Bayesian two-sided independent-samples t-test again provided 'substantial' evidence for null hypothesis (Bf=3.0 in support of no effect). (If valence has been a confound in our main experiments, the pupil should have be considerably larger in response to negative than positive words.)++

++Third, we found a weak but reliable correlation between brightness and emotional intensity (r=.22, p=.027), such that bright words were rated more emotionally intense than dark words; this would drive an effect in the opposite direction from what we observed, because emotionally intense stimuli (bright words in our case) trigger a strong pupillary dilation [e.g. @Goldwater1972]. Given that the correlation was only weak, we could take the effect of emotional intensity into account statistically by conducting a control analysis that was identical to the regression analysis described above, but included emotional intensity as control predictor. Using the same criteria as described above, this analysis again revealed a reliable effect of brightness in both experiments and in the expected direction (visual: 1260-2590 ms; auditory: 90-330 ms [possibly spurious given the early onset] and 830-1460 ms).++

++In summary, it is theoretically and statistically unlikely that the effect of semantic brightness on pupil size is driven by differences in valence and emotional intensity of our stimuli.++
